>> Larson: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SUNDAY, AUGUST 23:
THE LATEST ON THE PASSENGER
TRAIN ATTACK IN EUROPE STOPPED
BY THREE AMERICANS.
ALSO, HOW CHERNOBYL, ONCE
DEVASTATED BY NUCLEAR FALLOUT,
IS SHOWING SIGNS OF LIFE.
>> FOR WILDLIFE, MORE IMPORTANT,
ABSENCE OF PEOPLE, ABSENCE OF
THEIR ACTIVITY.
>> Larson: AND, A MOVEMENT IN
PUERTO RICO TO BECOME MORE FOOD
INDEPENDENT.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
JOHN LARSON.
>> Larson: GOOD EVENING, AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
I'M JOHN LARSON IN FOR HARI
SREENIVASAN.
FRENCH OFFICIALS HAVE CONFIRMED
THE IDENTITY OF THE WOULD-BE
MASS SHOOTER WHO TERRORIZED A
PASSENGER TRAIN IN EUROPE ON
FRIDAY NIGHT AND SAY HE IS AN
ISLAMIC EXTREMIST.
THE OFFICIALS SAY AYOUB EL-
KHAZZANI IS A 26-YEAR-OLD FROM
MOROCCO WHO LIVED IN SPAIN UNTIL
LAST YEAR, AND REUTERS REPORTS
HE TRAVELED TO WAR-TORN SYRIA.
EL-KAZZANI WAS CONVICTED OF DRUG
DEALING IN SPAIN.
TONIGHT, HE REMAINS IN FRENCH
POLICE CUSTODY.
FRENCH OFFICIALS SAY EL-
KHAZZANI, ARMED WITH AN AK-47
AND A LUGER PISTOL, BOARDED AN
AMSTERDAM-TO-PARIS TRAIN IN
BRUSSELS WITH A BACKPACK FULL OF
AMMUNITION.
AN ATTORNEY ASSIGNED TO
REPRESENT THE GUNMAN-- SEEN HERE
AFTER HE WAS SUBDUED AND TIED UP
BY PASSENGERS-- SAID HE MERELY
INTENDED TO ROB PASSENGERS, NOT
KILL THEM AND THAT HE DOES NOT
BELONG TO ANY TERRORIST GROUP.
>> (translated): ASKED HIM
ABOUT HIS MOTIVATIONS, IF HE HAD
RECEIVED INSTRUCTIONS, IF THERE
WAS A SPONSOR.
THESE ARE THE FIRST QUESTIONS I
ASKED HIM BASED ON THE NATURE OF
THIS CASE.
HE TOLD ME, 'NO'."
>> Larson: THREE YOUNG AMERICAN
FRIENDS ON VACATION STOPPED THE
ATTACK-- SPENCER STONE AND ALEK
SKARLATOS, BOTH IN THE MILITARY,
AND ANTHONY SADLER, A COLLEGE
SENIOR.
STONE, WHO TACKLED THE GUNMAN
AND WAS STABBED BY HIM, TOLD
REPORTERS IN PARIS TODAY HOW THE
FRIENDS RESPONDED WHEN THEY SAW
THE GUNMAN ON THE TRAIN.
>> ALEK JUST HIT ME ON THE
SHOULDER AND SAID, "LET'S GO!"
AND RAN DOWN, TACKLED HIM.
WE HIT THE GROUND.
ALEK CAME UP AND GRABBED THE GUN
OUT OF HIS HAND WHILE I PUT HIM
IN A CHOKEHOLD.
IT SEEMED LIKE HE JUST KEPT
PULLING MORE WEAPONS LEFT AND
RIGHT.
PULLED OUT A HANDGUN.
AL TOOK THAT.
TOOK OUT A BOXCUTTER, STARTED
JABBING AT ME WITH THAT.
WE LET GO.
ALL THREE OF US STARTED PUNCHING
HIM WHILE HE'S IN THE MIDDLE OF
US.
AND I WAS ABLE TO GRAB HIM AGAIN
AND CHOKE HIM UNCONSCIOUS.
>> Larson: JOINING ME NOW BY
SKYPE FROM PARIS TO DISCUSS THE
LATEST DEVELOPMENTS IN THE TRAIN
ATTACK INVESTIGATION IS ANDREW
CALLUS OF REUTERS.
>> ANDREW, THANKS SO MUCH FOR
JOINING US, TRAWL, YOU KNOW, WE
ARE JUST HEARING THAT, YOU KNOW,
THE FIRST GUN JAMMED, THE SECOND
ONE WASN'T FULLY LOADED IT
SOUNDED LIKE AN EXTRAORDINARILY
LUCKY SITUATION.
>> CERTAINLY, YES T3 YOUNG
AMERICAN MEN WHO WERE INVOLVED
IN THE BRINGING THOSE, THE
GUNMAN DOWN, GIVING PRESS
CONFERENCES A WHILE AGO AND THEY
SAID IT WAS QUITE CLEAR HE HAD
NO WEAPONS TRAINING, THROUGH
THOSE SERVICEMEN, SO I GUESS
THEY SHOULD KNOW.
>> WHERE DOES THAT LEAD
INVESTIGATORS TO THINK ABOUT
THIS GUNMAN?
WHERE WAS HE FROM?
>> HE SPENT HIS LIFE IN A VERY
POOR DRUG CRIME RIDDEN
UNEMPLOYMENT TYPE OF SUBURB OF
-- SO WE KNOW THAT ABOUT HIM.
A LOCAL COMMUNITY LEADER SAID HE
WAS A PRETTY ORDINARY YOUNG MAN
WHO PLAYED FOOTBALL, WENT
FISHING.
>> Larson: ARE THERE ANY
ACTUAL TIES BEING SHOWN YET TO
ANY TERRORIST GROUP?
>> NOT AS OF YET.
HE WAS -- SO HE WAS ON A LIST OF
SUSPECTED ISLAMIST MILITANTS.
HE BASICALLY HAD BEEN TIES TO
SOME GOODS.
THE BOLDEST ASSERTION WE HAVE
SEEN IS IN A BELGIAN NEWSPAPER
WHICH SAYS HE WAS LINKED TO THE
GROUP WHICH WAS INVOLVED IN A
SHOOTING IN BRUSSELS JUST A FEW
WEEKS, A FEW DAYS AFTER THE ONE
IN PARIS IN JANUARY.
>> Larson: I READ HE WAS ON
THIS F LIST IN FRANCE, WHERE
THEY ARE TRACKING, YOU KNOW,
PEOPLE THAT ARE CONCERNED ABOUT
-- HOW MANY PEOPLE ARE ON THESE
TYPES OF LISTS?
>> THE PRIME MINISTER EARLIER
THIS YEAR SAID THERE WERE 3,000
ON THAT F LIST WHO WERE
CONSIDERED TO BE ISLAMIST
MILITANTS AND OF COURSE THE
PROBLEM IS, UNTIL THEY ACTUALLY
DO SOMETHING THAT THEY CAN BE
ARRESTED FOR, THERE IS NOT VERY
MUCH ANYONE CAN DO TO ACTUALLY
STOP THEM FROM MOVING AROUND.
THE COUNTRIES THAT TRAIN AND
STRUGGLING THROUGH, PEOPLE
TRAVEL ACROSS THE BORDERS
WITHOUT PASSPORTS, WITHOUT
SECURITY CHECKS AND SO ON, SO
THESE PEOPLE CAN TRAVEL AROUND.
>> Larson: EVER SINCE FIRST
NEWS OF THIS ARRIVED HERE IN THE
UNITED STATES, THERE HAVE BEEN
QUESTIONS ABOUT WHETHER OR NOT
HE ACTUALLY, THE GUNMAN ACTUALLY
WENT TO SYRIA.
ANY NEWS ON THAT?
>> THE SOURCES HAVE BEEN SPANISH
SECURITY SERVICES ARE SAYING HE
DID GO TO SYRIA, FROM FRANCE,
NOT NECESSARILY DIRECTLY.
FRENCH SECURITY SERVICES SAY
THAT THEY KNOW HE TRAVELED FROM
BERLIN TO ISTANBUL AND ON THE
TENTH OF THIS YEAR, AT LEAST HE
WAS IN BERLIN AIRPORT ON HIS WAY
TO ISTANBUL.
NOW, ISTANBUL IN TURKEY, THAT IS
A DESTINATION FOR A LOT OF WOULD
BE EUROPEAN JIHADISTS, WANTING
TO GO AND JOIN THE FIGHT IN
SYRIA.
>> Larson: FINALLY, ANY IDEA
OF WHETHER OR NOT THEY ARE GOING
TO HAVE TO CHANGE OR RAMP UP
SECURITY MEASURES ON THE TRAIN?
>> THEY ARE CERTAINLY TALKING
ABOUT IT.
IT HAS BEEN A FEW YEARS NOW THAT
PEOPLE HAVE SAID THAT THESE HIGH
SPEED TRAINS BETWEEN THE
EUROPEAN COUNTRIES ARE
POTENTIALLY VULNERABLE TO AN
ATTACK, AND HERE WE HAVE ONE.
THAT IS CERTAINLY GOING TO BE A
DEBATE OVER THE COMING WEEKS.
>> Larson: ANDREW CALLUS FROM
REUTERS IN PARIS, THANK SO MUCH
FOR JOINING US.
>> MY PLEASURE.
>>
>> Larson: MORE THAN 4,000
MIGRANTS FROM THE MIDDLE EAST
AND AFRICA WERE RESCUED TRYING
TO CROSS THE MEDITERRANEAN SEA
YESTERDAY.
ITALY'S COAST GUARD COORDINATED
THE RESCUES WITH SHIPS FROM
OTHER EUROPEAN COUNTRIES.
THAT'S THE MOST MIGRANTS RESCUED
EVER IN A SINGLE DAY, THIS IN A
YEAR WHEN A QUARTER OF A MILLION
PEOPLE HAVE MADE THE CROSSING.
IN MACEDONIA, FOLLOWING SEVERAL
DAYS OF CLASHES WITH MIGRANTS AT
THE COUNTRY'S BORDER WITH
GREECE, MACEDONIA ALLOWED 1,500
MIGRANTS TO ENTER THE COUNTRY
OVERNIGHT.
MANY CROSSED INTO SERBIA TO
BOARD TRAINS AND BUSES CARRYING
THEM NORTH INTO WESTERN EUROPE.
THREE AMERICAN CIVILIAN
CONTRACTORS ARE AMONG THE 12
PEOPLE KILLED BY A SUICIDE
BOMBING IN THE AFGHANISTAN
CAPITAL OF KABUL.
THE ATTACKER RAMMED HIS VEHICLE
INTO A NATO CONVOY OUTSIDE A
DOWNTOWN HOSPITAL DURING RUSH
HOUR YESTERDAY.
THE CONTRACTORS, FROM DYNCORP,
DROVE MILITARY TRUCKS.
MORE THAN 60 CIVILIANS WERE
WOUNDED IN THE BOMBING.
THE TALIBAN DENIED IT WAS
RESPONSIBLE.
BUT NO GROUP HAS CLAIMED
RESPONSIBILITY.
THE BRITISH EMBASSY IN IRAN IS
OPEN FOR THE FIRST TIME IN FOUR
YEARS.
BRITAIN'S FOREIGN SECRETARY
PHILIP HAMMOND ATTENDED THE
FLAG-RAISING CEREMONY TODAY IN
TEHRAN.
THE EMBASSY HAD BEEN CLOSED
SINCE NOVEMBER 2011, WHEN
IRANIAN DEMONSTRATORS STORMED
THE BUILDING TO PROTEST
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC
SANCTIONS.
THE REOPENING COMES AFTER
BRITAIN, THE U.S., AND OTHER
MAJOR POWERS AGREED TO LIFT
SANCTIONS IF IRAN CURBS ITS
NUCLEAR PROGRAM.
A SIMILAR CEREMONY TOOK PLACE AT
THE IRANIAN EMBASSY IN LONDON.
SOUTH KOREA IS WARNING NORTH
KOREA HAS DOUBLED ITS ARTILLERY
STRENGTH ALONG THEIR SHARED
BORDER AND SENT 50 SUBMARINES
AWAY FROM THEIR BASES.
THE DEPLOYMENTS COMES AS SENIOR
OFFICIALS FROM NORTH AND SOUTH
KOREA MET FOR A SECOND DAY TODAY
TO DIFFUSE TENSIONS.
THE TALKS BEGAN YESTERDAY IN A
VILLAGE IN THE DEMILITARIZED
ZONE, WHERE EARLIER THIS WEEK
THE COUNTRIES EXCHANGED
ARTILLERY FIRE.
THE CRISIS BEGAN WHEN LAND MINES
IN THE D.M.Z. INJURED TWO SOUTH
KOREAN SOLDIERS AND SOUTH KOREA
RESUMED BLARING PROPAGANDA
MESSAGES ON LOUDSPEAKERS FACING
THE NORTH.
LEARN MORE ABOUT THE MIGRANTS
WHO ARE ARRIVING EN MASSE IN
GREECE.
VISIT US ONLINE AT
PBS.ORG/NEWSHOUR.
THE MELTDOWN AT THE CHERNOBYL
PLANT IN UKRAINE, IN 1986, WAS
THE WORST NUCLEAR POWER ACCIDENT
IN HISTORY.
THE RESULTING PLUME OF
RADIOACTIVE DUST SPREAD ACROSS
NORTHERN EUROPE AND TURNED THE
AREA SURROUNDING THE PLANT INTO
AN UNINHABITABLE GHOST TOWN.
THREE DECADES LATER, HOWEVER,
THE NATURAL ENVIRONMENT AND
WILDLIFE AROUND CHERNOBYL ARE
SHOWING SIGNS OF RECOVERY.
ITN'S SCIENCE EDITOR TOM CLARKE
REPORTS.
>> EVERY RIDE IS A GHOST TRAIN.
NOW, THE LOUDEST VOICES HERE ARE
THE CUCKOOS AND THE PHYSICS
CLASSROOM TIME IS OUT OF THE
EQUATION.
THIS WAS A SHOWCASE NUCLEAR CITY
FOR ELITE SCIENTISTS AND
ENGINEERS.
NOW ALL THAT IS LEFT IS A VISION
OF WHAT THE WORLD MIGHT LOOK
LIKE IF ALL THE PEOPLE SUDDENLY
DISAPPEARED.
>> IT IS JUST TWO MILES FROM THE
CHERNOBYL REACTOR COMPLEX.
>>
>> AUGUST 26, 1918 IT BLEW UP
AND CAUGHT FIRE.
THE UNLUCKY FEW WHO DEALT WITH
THE WORST OF THE CLEANUP DIED
FROM RADIATION SICKNESS.
EVERYONE ELSE IN THE VICINITY
WAS EVACUATED TO ESCAPE THE
WORSE OF THE FALLOUT.
>> THE REMAINS A YOUNG THOUSAND
SQUARE MILE EXCLUSION ZONE ALL
AROUND THE PLANET.
>> ALTHOUGH IT MAY STILL BE ONE
OF THE LONELIEST PLACES ON
EARTH, IT IS FAR FROM EMPTY.
THERE CAN'T BE A MORE POWERFUL
DISPLAY OF THE RISK OF
RADIATION, 30,000 PEOPLE USED TO
LIVE HERE BUT COME BACK 30 YEARS
AFTER THEY ARE ALL EVACUATED,
WHAT STRIKES YOU IS THAT IT IS
AN EQUALLY POWERFUL SYMBOL OF
OUR INFLUENCE OVER NATURE.
IF YOU TAKE HUMANS OUT OF THE
EQUATION, THE WILDLIFE SURGE IS
BACK, DESPITE THE CONTAMINATION.
>> WE ARE HERE TO GO ON A
FALLOUT FIELD TRIP INTO ONE OF
THE MOST RADIOACTIVE AREAS OF
THE ZONE.
>> 30 YEARS ON THERE IS NO NEED
FOR GLOVES OR MASKS, BUT THE
SUITS PREVENT US FROM CARRYING
CONTAMINATED SOIL AND DUST HOME.
ECOLOGIST MIKE WOOD LEADS THE
PROJECT.
>> THIS IS THE RIDGE OF THE...
AND IT IS A VILLAGE THAT SITS ON
THE WESTERN TRACE.
>> AND THE WESTERN TRACE IS PART
OF A PLUME --
>> OF THE FALLOUT THAT CAME FROM
THE INITIAL EXPLOSION OF THE
PLANT.
>> YES.
THE NARROW PLUME EXTENDS OFF TO
THE WEST, AND AT THIS PARTICULAR
LOCATION THE LEVELS OF
CONTAMINATION WAS SUCH THAT SOME
OF THE BUILDINGS WERE
DELIBERATELY DEMOLISHED AND, TO
CLEAN UP THE ACTIVITY.
>> THE GUIDE IS A UKRAINIAN
SCIENTIST WHO KNOWS MORE ABOUT
THE WILDLIFE HERE THAN PERHAPS
ANYONE ELSE.
HE PIONEERED THE USE OF CAMERA
TRAPS TO STUDY ECOLOGY IN THIS
FORBIDDEN ZONE.
BUT BEFORE THEY SWITCH ON THE
EQUIPMENT, THREE DECADES WORTH
OF READING TO GET ON WITH.
THERE IS A POPULAR CONCEPTION
THAT RADIATED FALLOUT FROM
CHERNOBYL SOMEHOW DEVASTATED THE
NATURAL ENVIRONMENT HERE BUT
WHEN YOU COME TO THE ZONE YOU
REALIZE THAT IS ANYTHING BUT.
THE CASE ON WHAT THESE
SCIENTISTS ARE TRYING TO FIGURE
OUT IS JUST HOW WILDLIFE MANAGES
WITH THAT RADIOACTIVITY.
>> ALSO TO STUDY ITS RETURN TO
WHAT USED TO BE A HUMAN
ENVIRONMENT.
>> AND TAKE A LOOK AT WHAT THEY
FOUND.
OVER THE LAST YEAR, THEY, THE
CAMERA TRAPS HAVE CAUGHT THE
RETURN OF EUROPEAN BISON AS
HEAVY AS A CAR AND ABSENT FOR
CENTURIES, WOLVES, NEVER SEEN
HERE BEFORE THE ACCIDENT, SLOWLY
MIGRATED IN FROM NEIGHBORING
BELARUS.
HORSES ARE THRIVING, ALONG WITH
WILD BOAR, EUROPE'S LARGEST CAT,
THE LYNX AND LAST WINTER A
INCREDIBLE DISCOVERY, A BROWN
BEAR, THE FIRST EVER RECORDED IN
EASTERN UKRAINE.
>> DO YOU SAY THIS LOOKS LIKE A
HEALTHIER ECOSYSTEM THAN AREAS
OUTSIDE THE ZONE IN THE UKRAINE?
>> ABSOLUTELY.
ABSOLUTELY MUCH MORE HEALTHY.
BECAUSE SINCE FOR WILDLIFE, MORE
IMPORTANT, ABSENCE OF PEOPLE,
ABSENCE OF THEIR ACTIVITY.
>> BUT HE WILL NEED MORE
EVIDENCE AND PUTTING CAMERA
TRAPS IN AREAS OF THE ZONE THAT
HAVE VARYING LEVELS OF FALLOUT,
THEY ARE NOT JUST LOOKING BUT
LISTENING.
WHAT WE HAVE GOT HERE IS A
WILDLIFE RECORDER, SO THIS IS
GOING TO CAPTURE THE SOUNDSCAPE
OF THE AREA THAT WE ARE IN.
IT IS GOING TO CAPTURE THE NOISE
FROM THE INVERT BRATS FLIES
BUZZING AROUND AND CAPTURE
SOUNDS OF THE BIRDS SINGING, IT
WILL CAPTURE NOISES OF LARGE
IMAGINE MALLS COMING THROUGH
THIS AREA.
>> NICE.
>> IT WILL GIVE US A PICTURE,
SOUND PICTURE OF THE WILDLIFE
PRESENT IN THE AREA.
>> THERE IS MUCH NEEDED
RESEARCH, SOME PREVIOUS STUDIES
HAVE CLAIMED TO FIND SERIOUS
IMPACTS OF RADIOACTIVITY BUT SO
FAR THIS TEAM'S WORK FOUND
LITTLE EFFECT OUTSIDE OF THE
MOST CONTAMINATED AREAS.
>> THE STUDIES ARE QUITE
CONFUSED AS TO WHETHER OR NOT
THAT IS THE CASE, SO ACTUALLY
HERE IN CHERNOBYL IT IS MORE TO
LEARN ABOUT HOW THE ANIMALS IN
CHERNOBYL ARE FAIRING FAIRING.
THEY ARE NO SIGNIFICANT CHANGE
AT THE POPULATION LEVEL THEN WE
START NEED TO RETHINK OUR
ASSESSMENT OF EXAMINING WHAT
LEVEL CAN BE DESCRIBED AS SAFE.
>> AND EVEN IN HIGHLY
CONTAMINATED ANIMALS, THE
SCIENTIFIC DEBATE ABOUT WHAT
HARMFUL EFFECTS OF RADIATION
REALLY ARE, AND STANDING NOW
ABOVE THE COOLING PONDS OF THE
REACTORS, TAKE A LOOK AT THESE
FISH.
>> THESE WILDCAT FISH HAVE GROWN
UP TO EIGHT FEET LONG, THEY HAVE
BEEN DESCRIBED AS RADIOACTIVE
MUTANTS, AND IT IS TRUE.
STUDIES HAVE SHOWN DAMAGE TO
THEIR DNA FROM RADIOACTIVE MUD
IN WHICH THEY FEED, BUT BY EVERY
OTHER MEASURE THEY ARE HEALTHY
AND NUMEROUS.
THE TRUTH IS, THEY ARE BIG
BECAUSE THEY LIKE BLOOD FROM
VISITORS BUT NO ONE IS ALLOWED
TO CATCH THEM.
IT MAKES IT HARD NOW TO IMAGINE
THE DISASTER IN THIS REACTOR
RELEASED 400 TIMES INTO
RADIOACTIVITY, FROM THE
HIROSHIMA BOMB.
>> THIS EXCLUSION ZONE IS NOT
RADIOACTIVE ANYMORE BUT BECAUSE
OF THE WAY THE FALLOUT FELL
IMMEDIATELY AFTER THE EXPLOSION
SOME AREAS ARE STILL VERY
RADIOACTIVE.
THIS IS ABOUT 5000 TIMES NORMAL
BACKGROUND RADIATION.
IT IS HARMFUL IN SMALL DOSES BUT
YOU WOULDN'T WANT TO SPEND TOO
LONG HERE AT ALL.
BUT IT IS ALL RELATIVE.
THE RADIATION DOSE WE RECEIVED
DURING OUR ENTIRE TRIP TO THE
ZONE WAS SIMILAR TO WHAT YOU
WOULD GET FROM A SINGLE
TRANSATLANTIC FLIGHT.
>> SHE HAS AS MUCH RESPECT FOR
RADIATION AS SHE DOES FOR
AUTHORITY.
>> SHE TELLS US HOW SHE SENT
THEM PACKING MORE THAN ONCE.
ORDERED TO LEAVE IN 1986, SHE
CAME BACK A YEAR LATER TO LIVE
IN THE HOUSE IN WHICH SHE WAS
BORN.
SHE IS 87.
>>
>> LEVELS THEY FOUND WEREN'T
HIGH AND THIS IS THE GARDEN SHE
FED HERSELF FROM EVERY DAY.
HER ONLY REAL COMPLAINT IS THE
LACK OF RAIN AND THE POTATO
BEATLES EATING AWAY THROUGH HER
SPUDS.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH, IT WAS
NICE TO MEET YOU.
>> SHE WAVES US OFF AND WE LEAVE
HER TO GET BACK TO ONE OF THE
QUIETEST LIVES IN THE WORLD.
>> THEN BACK ALONG THE DECADE
ROADS AND INTO THE BUSH TO CHECK
THE CAMERA TRAPS.
IN THE THICK VEGETATION OF
SUMMER, WE FAILED TO SPOT ANY
LARGE ANIMALS, BUT THEY ARE MOST
CERTAINLY HERE.
>> BESIDES FROM OVERNIGHT, THE
SORT OF ANIMAL IT IS TEAMS ARE
HERE TO STUDY.
LOOK AT THAT, MOTHER AND BABY
MOOSE.
>> WHAT A FANTASTIC SHOT.
>> CHERNOBYL WAS A HUMAN
DISASTER IN EVERY SENSE, IT COST
LIVES, HUNDREDS OF BILLIONS OF
DOLLARS, AND PERPETUATED A FEAR
THAT FOLLOWS NUCLEAR POWER TO
THIS DAY.
BUT ANOTHER PART IS LEGACY IS
NOW EMERGING.
THE MESS LEFT BEHIND BANISHED
HUMANS AND GAVE NATURE THE UPPER
HAND.
THIS ZONE IS NOW ONE OF THE FEW
PLACES IN THE WORLD THAT IS
GETTING WILDER.
>> Larson: WITH $72 BILLION IN
BOND DEBT THE PUERTO RICAN
GOVERNMENT SAYS IT CANNOT REPAY,
OFFICIALS THERE HOPE BOOSTING
AGRICULTURE PRODUCTION WILL HELP
FIX THE ECONOMY.
PUERTO RICO GROWS ONLY A SMALL
PORTION OF ITS FOOD SUPPLY, BUT
THERE IS A SMALL MOVEMENT ON THE
ISLAND TO TRY AND TURN THINGS
AROUND.
THE NEWSHOUR'S IVETTE FELICIANO
HAS THE STORY.
>> Reporter: FOR TWO YEARS, CHEF
PAXX MOLL HAS BEEN PREPARING
FARM-TO-TABLE MEALS AT THE SAN
JUAN RESTAURANT EL DEPARTAMENTO
DE LA COMIDA, WHICH MEANS "THE
DEPARTMENT OF FOOD."
>> (translated): WHEN I COOK,
EVERYONE IS A VIP, MOLL SAYS.
YOU GIVE SOME OF YOUR SOUL AND
LOVE TO THE PERSON.
>>CUATRO LIBRAS DE
HABICHUELAS, 15 QUESOS.
>> Reporter: MOLL WORKS WITH A
SMALL NETWORK OF PUERTO RICAN
FARMERS FOR THE RESTAURANTS
ORGANIC, SIGNATURE DISHES, LIKE
THEIR FALAFEL-PLANTAIN FRITTERS
AND COCONUT FLATBREAD.
>> I THINK IT'S FRESH FOOD WITH
PUERTO RICAN ESSENCE AND IT'S
ALL LOCALLY GROWN, WHICH MAKES
IT UBER PUERTO RICAN.
>> Reporter: YET GETTING QUALITY
INGREDIENTS FROM PUERTO RICO IS
NOT EASY.
ON THIS LUSH TROPICAL ISLAND,
MORE THAN 85% OF WHAT PEOPLE EAT
IS IMPORTED.
SEAFOOD, MEATS, AND STAPLES LIKE
RICE AND BEANS AND COFFEE MOSTLY
COME FROM THE UNITED STATES,
NEIGHBORING LATIN AMERICAN
COUNTRIES AND EVEN CHINA.
THE MAIN REASON: PUERTO RICO'S
AGRICULTURAL SECTOR IS DISMAL,
REPRESENTING LESS THAN 1% OF THE
ISLAND'S GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT.
>> Reporter: CARLOS REYES-
ALBINO, ONE OF THE CO-OWNERS OF
THE RESTAURANT, SAYS THE
ISLAND'S DEPENDENCE ON IMPORTS
MAKES IT DANGEROUSLY VULNERABLE
TO ANY UNFORESEEN EVENT
THREATENING ITS FOOD SUPPLY.
>> Reporter: IN FACT, PUERTO
RICO'S AGRICULTURE SECRETARY
WARNS THE TERRITORY ONLY HAS A
ONE-MONTH FOOD SUPPLY ON HAND.
SO THE GOVERNMENT HAS
IMPLEMENTED A PLAN TO RE-DEVELOP
THE ISLAND'S AGRICULTURAL
SECTOR, PROVIDING FARMERS WITH
SUBSIDIES AND NEW EQUIPMENT.
ALREADY, IN THE LAST TWO YEARS,
PUERTO RICO HAS SEEN A 25%
INCREASE IN AGRICULTURE REVENUES
AND 6,500 NEW JOBS.
THE RESTAURANT EL DEPARTAMENTO
DE LA COMIDA IS ALSO TRYING TO
ENGAGE MORE LOCAL FARMERS.
>> THERE'S A LOT OF VARIETY HERE
THERE'S ANON, THERE'S
GRAPEFRUIT.
>> Reporter: FARMER DANIEL
CADENAS HAS BEEN PROVIDING THE
RESTAURANT WITH ORGANIC PRODUCE
FOR TWO YEARS.
>> I THINK IT'S REALLY POSITIVE
WHAT THEY'RE DOING, BECAUSE
THEY'RE HELPING PROMOTE WHAT IS
THE AGRICULTURE IN PUERTO RICO.
>> Reporter: CADENAS SPLITS HIS
TIME BETWEEN HIS FAMILY'S
MEDICAL BILLING BUSINESS AND
THEIR 25 ACRE FARM IN THE TOWN
OF CAROLINA, ABOUT 20 MILES
OUTSIDE OF SAN JUAN.
HE HOPES MORE PEOPLE IN PUERTO
RICO WILL SEE FARMING IN A NEW
LIGHT.
>> IT'S VERY IMPORTANT THAT
PEOPLE GET BACK TO THEIR ROOTS
AND THEY LEARN HOW TO DEAL WITH
THE LAND AND HOW TO GROW THEIR
OWN PRODUCE.
WE KIND OF HAVE LOST THAT OR
HAVE NOT DONE ENOUGH OF IT, AND
WE CAN DEFINITELY PRODUCE OUR
OWN AND WON'T HAVE TO DEPEND ON
AN OUTSIDE SUPPLY.
>> Reporter: THE SHORTAGE OF
LOCALLY GROWN FOOD HERE RESULTS
FROM A DECLINE IN FARMING AND
SOCIAL STIGMA.
SUGAR WAS THE DOMINANT CROP.
BUT THE GRUELING AND LOW-PAYING
WORK ON MOSTLY AMERICAN-OWNED
PLANTATIONS, GAVE RISE TO THE
TERM "JIBARO," FOR PEASANT.
A WORD ALSO SYNONYMOUS WITH
IGNORANCE AND POVERTY.
>> Reporter: AN INTERNATIONAL
COLLAPSE IN SUGAR PRICES AFTER
WORLD WAR II LED PUERTO RICO TO
FOCUS MORE ON INDUSTRIALIZATION.
TODAY, THE ISLAND USES A QUARTER
OF ITS AGRICULTURAL LAND.
THE FOLKS AT THE RESTAURANT EL
DEPARTAMENTO DE LA COMIDA SAY
THEY'LL CONTINUE TO DO THEIR
SMALL PART TO GET PUERTO RICO ON
TRACK TO A SUSTAINABLE FUTURE IN
FOOD.
>> Larson: AND NOW, TO VIEWERS
LIKE YOU, YOUR CHANCE TO COMMENT
ON OUR WORK.
HERE'S SOME OF WHAT YOU HAD TO
SAY ABOUT YESTERDAY'S STORY FROM
PUERTO RICO, WHERE CRIPPLING
DEBT AND INCREASING HEALTHCARE
COSTS HAVE CONTRIBUTED TO THE
ISLAND'S HISTORIC FINANCIAL
CRISIS.
JEFF IN MADISON COMMENTED:
ROB ROCKLIN ADDED:
BUT THERE WAS THIS FROM JORGE
RODRIGUEZ SANABRIA:
AND CANDID ONE HAD THIS TO SAY:
SOME TOOK A BROADER VIEW.
BRUCE McCOY SAID:
L. JAMIE CHRISTOPHER COMMENTED:
AND FINALLY, THERE WAS THIS FROM
MALCOM:
AS ALWAYS WE WELCOME YOUR
COMMENTS.
VISIT US AT PBS.ORG/NEWSHOUR, ON
OUR FACEBOOK PAGE, OR TWEET US
AT NEWSHOUR.
AND FINALLY TOMORROW FRENCH
PRESIDENT FRANCOIS WILL PRESENT
THE THREE AMERICANS AND ONE
BRITISH CITIZEN WHO STOPPED THAT
TRAIN GUNMAN, THE COUNTRY'S
HIGHEST AWARD, THE LEGION OF
HONOR.
REPORTS ON HURRICANE KATRINA TEN
YEARS LATER.
THIS IS JOHN LARSON, HARI
SREENIVASAN WILL BE BACK NEXT
WEEK.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.